[ From: http://www.computerworld.com/home/print.nsf/all/9903229872 ]
[ ComputerWorld 3/22/99 ]
When Good Scanners Go Bad

Crackers are turning some scanning tools against the networks they 
should protect

By Ann Harrison
03/22/99 Network scanning tools help information
technology managers find security holes such as open ports
or lists of running services on a host. But crackers are
using a new generation of "stealth" scanners to plot
attacks on the networks they were designed to protect.

Stealth scanners are dangerous because they can be
modified to fall under the threshold of audit trails and
intrusion-detection systems, making the attempted probes
harder to detect.

"with the traditional thresholds you set up and patterns
you look for, you are not going to be able to pick it up,"
said Karen Evans, a senior network security official at
the U.S. Department of Justice.

One stealth scanner, a shareware tool known as Nmap
(available at www.insecure.org/nmap), was recently
identified by the Shadow intrusion-detection team at the
Naval Surface Warfare Center as the likely source of
recent highly publicized attacks on Pentagon computer
systems.

Although Nmap isn't new, the recently released Version
2.08 gained TCP/IP fingerprinting capability, which allows
crackers to identify almost 200 separate operating systems
remotely and thus target their attacks. Nmap also sends
out decoy packets of data over the network to mask the
true source of a scan. When Department of Defense
officials suggested that the Pentagon attacks were the
work of overseas crackers, the Shadow team pointed to
Nmap.

Nmap probes networks by sending data packets to ports, or
entry points to network servers, using TCP and Unreliable
Datagram Protocol. Crackers can also use Nmap to
automatically probe many sites on a network for
vulnerabilities.

Analysts from the Shadow team recognized Nmaps from its
distinctive use of syn packets, which are the first
packets sent from client to server when a TCP connection
is opened. Nmap typically sends syn packets to a random
range of destination ports, then sends packets to ports
with high numbers, and finally more syn packets to a
single port.
                              
Instead of scanning network ports at random, Nmap lets
crackers launch precisely planned attacks. Nmap is
relatively easy to use and can scan a network in seconds.
According to John Green, a member of the Shadow team who
participated in an online Nmap briefing this month, the
tool brings greater sophistication to a wider number of
crackers.

"The intelligence that can be garnered using Nmap is
extensive," Green said. "Everything that a wiley hacker
needs to know about your system is there."

Security consultants recommend running your own Nmap scans
to find unsecured servers that can be accessed around the
corporate firewall.
                              
The Shadow team has integrated Nmap into its scanning
as has NASA's Ames Research Center at Moffett
Field, Calif.

"Right now, it's basically a suffer-along scenario," Green
said. But Nmap lets security managers "know what the
hackers know about you," he added.

David Remnitz, managing partner at IFsec, a New York
computer security consulting firm, said network managers
should also adjust intrusion-detection thresholds and
place their intrusion-detection tools on the same network
segment as the machines they protect. Though that approach
screens out random network traffic and highlights
suspicious packets, Remnitz acknowledged that it may also
generate false alarms.

"If you make it too sensitive, you start tripping a lot of
false positives, and then you become immune to false
positives and you miss something," Evans observed.

Jacob Carlson, IFsec's senior security consultant, said
Nmap is a particular threat to Linux users because many
developers have access to the source code and because
security holes are rapidly disseminated. Carlson said
proxy firewalls keep scanners from evaluating network
architecture, and he urges the use of host-based and
network-based intrusion-detection systems.
                              
"It takes constant monitoring," Evans said. "It's not one
tool over another; it's the mind-set of the staff who
review our systems, read information, put in proper
patches and do proper testing."
